We should put it right out front. I'm gonna put it right from my one piece of advice.
I got back in film school and is always and only gets more true. Every year I write, which is right, the experience.
Hi. I'm chas fisher. And welcome to draft zero. A podcast. Where to? Ozzy? Filmmakers try to work out what makes great screenplays work.
And I'm stu willis.
I was coming. Thought you're going to do the emerging filmmakers so I could make the gag that will segue way us into this episode because we've been emerging screenwriters for over five years now.
Well, more than five years. But we've been doing his podcast for five years at this point over five years.
And it's time for our and you're way only Now we do it once a year backmatter once appointed time.
This used to be front matter. We're used to the front of episodes And then we stood at the back and now he decided to wrap it up and stick it into one episode so people can download it and never listened to it, Which is fine if you stop listening now that is cooked.
Just continue to download us.
S. So this is like just for the uninitiated.
Backmatter episodes are where we so as, ah, guiding principle in us recording draft zero.
We've tried to take an empirical approach to,
solving problems that we come across in our own writing and filmmaking craft, and we pick great examples from films that we love, and we try and break them down and apply them to our own writing.
But as the years have gone by, we feel that there is, as much as we,
try to not hold out our opinions as gospel or anything like that, that there's value in us talking about our careers and processes and where we're at and they've said have ended up bundle together as backmatter.
Yeah, I guess it's an opportunity for us. Tow. Keep it real and remind every people that a cz muchas we are white men with authority of sounding voices were not that authorities,
but don't tell other people in our lives that or potential employers where heaps authority if we know exactly how to fix this grip.
Well, I do love when I like. I follow,
tonnes of writers on Twitter and listen to tonnes of writing podcasts, and I love it when really successful, professional riders are up front about their struggles and all the projects that they've had fail.
I mean, for those of you haven't heard it, you must listen to the children of ten do doubleheader episode on pitching.
They recorded an entire pitch that they put together, which felt like months and months of writing work and talked about the different studios that they took it to and how the pitch was received on DH.
How that process worked. And that was just to me. Such amazing insight.
Which is a terrible comparison because I'm not sure we're going to offer anything like that. Amazing insights here, kind of more. We're going to keep it real about what it's like to be a screenwriter. That's not in L. A. And not really making stuff.
Don't take too seriously. We had literally, recently so soused, often self deprecating. We've had a new listener just say I stopped listening to you when Stu's said that he doesn't hasn't done any writing recently and it's like.
Yes, I do. I haven't done any writing and we'LL get to that topic governing.
Done any writing because it's been, to be honest, twenty nineteen has Bean thie Year of Hell from Hey, I just think that's going to keep getting worse.
But handed in two scripts at the beginning of the year that were both probably proper.
Real jobs may have two scripts going into production, and I'm saying that up front because one of those script cities nearly going into production, is nearly being going into production for, like, three or four years.
But it seems pretty likely, like I've seen the potential class list in all that stuff, so excitement.
But, you know, it says a lot about screenwriting, I think, and the need for lack of a better word social proof that we believe people who have got produced material on DH, we don't.
But as most of writers will say, a lot of the job of writing will never get seen. You know, it's the tip of the iceberg that gets made, but we're kind of going a little bit off topic of what we want to discuss here.
I guess that is us trying to offer up some social proof about way should still listen to us doing backmatter, which is yes, we're working on stuff I write, Chazz writes.
Stuff is moving forward, which is this's five years of just zero presented us an opportunity to kind of reflect upon five years of doing this podcast, not in a putting ourselves on the back.
Way, but it's an opportunity to kind of reflect upon our own writing processes, and.
This's the bit wearing it slightly Winkie.
How draft zero fits into how other people practise into the practises of other writers that dip in and out of this podcast, because I think there's probably accordance that has been with us for a long time.
But I also suspect that there are writers who get excited about screenwriting. Probably.
We're trying to learn as much as they can at the beginning. When they're starting on, they keep out of two years and realise that screenwriting is really hard, and they either drop off or they fade or ghost like they're doing online dating, you know,
and they're taking someone who just like slowly ghosts, um, on DH.
They feel that way about screenwriting, so for us with fifty five, fifty six, fifty years, seven episodes.
Let's just say fifty five, because let's not count the first two.
It's like Quentin Tarantino's first film was not Reservoir Dogs.
He doesn't mention that, you know, or for those who listen to thrash metal, Pantera never mentioned their first three glam albums.
There in Really Existed after Phil Marcel Move arrived on the scene.
I kind of like that. Let's just signal those two episodes. So this is kind of an opportunity for us to discuss,
kind of the practicalities of how we approach writing, how draft zero has changed, that potentially offer some guidance for those that are beginning their riding journey.
Or and possibly not a primer.
I'm trying to think another word for those that are have been listening the whole way, but kind of a moment of reflection.
What is that? That thing? It's like a dissertation. It's kind of like reflective writing. If you do like creative, work it like a masters or phD level, and you have to do it exegesis.
That's the term that's an opportunity for youto reflect and perform your own exit. Jesus!
Oh my God. Ah.
So Sue, How has five years of draft zero changed? How you right?
Do you want to start that? Because I just ranted without a breath for like a minute.
Sure, I'LL ask myself that question.
Hey, Chazz. How was five years of draft zero changed your right?
It's really hard to tell. To be honest, my writing has gotten a lot better.
What I can really tell from draft zero is my feedback to other writers has improved immensely,
because now I can articulate in useful terms,
much more precise terms.
What I feel is or is not working about other people's work and how I would go about fixing it and presenting options to do that without being,
prescriptive or giving examples, but rather approaches.
And I feel that because of that, I can't help but,
imagine that that also feeds into my own writing as well, so that when I get feedback in there, think saying this this and this isn't working, then I've got much more tools at my disposal to figure out all right.
Well, the problem isn't right there.
It's actually way back over here, and I need to tweak that scene and layer this stuff in and seed that earlier and swap those two scenes around.
And it's, I think, like all things you listen to script notes and they throw out so much knowledge offhandedly, and it's just because they've been writing for so long that it's.
Some of that is just part and parcel of their process.
And not to say that I'm in any way at that level. But it's certainly I don't have to go back now and re listen to some of our episodes, say on.
Tactics or seen transitions because those are things that I'm now automatically doing.
So the most recent pilot.
Okay, the most recent pilot I've written, I wrote it in two weeks.
The structure has not changed at all, and it's only taken three. Polish is for me to go to market with it, which is very, very different.
Three things like a lot.
Yeah.
I'm just being facetious. Stu-willis.
Well, no. All my other projects, they just go through numerous draughts like complete restructuring, taking it back to cards, putting it back together, passed palm, passed palm pass to improve, improve, improve.
And anyway, so how has dropped your approved your writing studio?
Okay, so I'm before I answer that question, I'm going to reflect on the offhandedly because I think this is the goal for me.
So I'm going to relate it to my editing day job because I've worked in post production for a long time.
So I went into an agency that I've been working with lately for last week, and one of their junior editors was like, Wow, you're the infamous Ju. I really love your work.
She's like second year out of union. She's like, how long you've been editing for and I'm going on, learn howto first started editing, play around with editing on Super VHS tape to tape decks and like, the mid nineties,
and then I'm like, Oh, so but, you know, professionally, maybe,
fifteen years.
And she's like, Wow, do you still love it? And I don't know, loves the right word.
But what I found is the like as you get older, like you realise the value of experience And this is where I like my writing to go is that I no longer think about the craft of editing.
I know long like I do think about it in the moment, but no longer stay out late at night going or is that a good edit?
I confined the cut points. I confined the technicalities to make something work easier.
What makes me valuable for an employer is because I work in advertising is that I have very high level conversations about messaging.
And in fact, I probably even have a conversation about What is it you're trying to communicate at a level beyond, like ask questions of the marketing people and the crate is that they haven't even thought about right.
And they definitely I'm not saying that I do it all myself. They provide guidance.
I just have a visual literacy in relation to editing.
They do not have, so I can sit there and go.
Thiss communicates thiss ai communicates this be communicates this Which do you prefer, right? And I think at some point between people like Jon and Craig, that is what they're actually doing. That's where you want your writing to be, right?
Like you want to be able to go. Thiss is my idea and I know how to execute it. Right?
And so much of what we've been trying to do with draft zero as much as we talk about house, what we're doing is narrative aesthetics.
I'm gonna use that word because we talk about aesthetics, land Iran, that what we're trying to get people to do is think about stuff on an execution level.
What is it that I want the audience to feel and what can I do to achieve that?
And I think draft zero overall has made me a lot more conscious off that and also more subconscious. So when I'm writing scenes, I don't think about that stuff.
We wrote a double bang, a pilot man.
I like a lot of pre had gone in al scene Breakdown was extensive.
But we wrote a draught and a polish off a double being a pilot in like, three weeks, and it went to market and it good, but the feedback we're getting on it, there's nothing to do with our craft.
It's absolutely to do with the direction of the material.
And to me that is a good sign when people are coming back to you, commenting on your writing, not in terms of ***. This doesn't make sense. But is this where we want the project to go?
That's a good sign, right? That's a sign that out riding on a very basic mechanical level is working fundamentally.
You want to ask me what draft zero has taught me in me? Reading a whole bunch of unproduced screenplays is that most people don't know how to write a scene, that the basics of screenwriting is seen work.
But the problem is getting through a whole feature script means you need to under learn the macro A CZ. Well, you need to understand how to write structure So you Khun see through running twenty something thousand words on one hundred pages.
But what is going to make it work for the reader is Sean's.
That's kind of like I've read enough.
I've read about first draught scripts that you read the first *** two pages, and you like they can't even write a scene. I'm not going to read the rest. It doesn't matter if they have their mid point.
That doesn't matter if they've got this killer third act. If you can't write a scene that holds my attention, it's actually doesn't.
And to your point that I think that's another thing that's improved in my feedback is when I get a script and there's something that's not working for me.
What I'll say to the writer is, This is what I think you're going for but this is how it's landing with me,
on I then don't give them feedback as to how to change that moment, because clearly they want it what I then discusses what you need to do to make that moment, do what I think you wanted to do.
Yeah, I think in this kind of relates to ascetics. I think for a lot of people when they're starting out, I don't think it's the IRA glass. The gap We'LL put a link into the show notes. It's like the shadow version of.
Nobody tells people who are beginners. And I really wish somebody had told this to May Is that all of us who do creative work like, you know, we get into it and we get into it because we have good taste.
But it's like there's a gap that for the first couple of years that you're making stuff.
What you're making isn't so good. Okay, it's not that great. It Sze trying to be good has ambition. Too good, but it's not quite that good.
But your taste, the thing that got you into the game you have taste is still killer. And your taste is good enough that you can tell that what you're making is kind of a disappointment to you, You know what I mean?
Hi. People never get past that face. A lot of people at that point.
The shadow version of the Gap, which is that I think a lot of people see their intent, not their execution.
And yeah.
So often they'll get offended that people didn't understand their script because they, under the understand their script and therefore your idiot, for my understanding there script.
They're actually the craft lies in the ability to read your own material, and this is something we all have to learn to see the original material objectively and see what you've ridden, not what you intended to communicate.
What did you actually say? Not what you intended to say.
In fact, that's good advice for life, right?
Which is not to say that I can do that. But I built it into my process where I send it to people and get back from them what isn't working, what isn't landing the way that I want it to land.
Maybe it's now unless we can, like pat ourselves on the backs of more like transgression, transgressions,
more transgressive, die aggress or Segway into how we used to approach writing,
five years ago and how I approach it now because I think if there are listeners that air starting with draft zero because they've heard about us and the hitting play on this episode, let's be honest.
If draft zero is very erratic, we kind of ice skate from topic to topic based on what is interested. Chazz and I and I was over the five years off us writing kind of see our interests have gone from the very kind of, I mean status transactions, basics.
I kind of think that Austrians actions of basic now, but mid points and point of view and these kind of fundamental building blocks to kind of more esoteric topics. I mean, antagonism doesn't sound esoteric, but then we found a way to make it *** esoteric.
You know that there is something to be said about how we would just literally approach the nuts and bolts of writing a screenplay.
You just say you're a novelist and we've had a few numbers. Listen to us. You know, they understand Storey, but they're in stand screenplay ts.
So how did you approach screenwriting?
Ahs, muchas you remember five years ago. And how do you approach it now? And where?
And then is there a synthesis between the two of how you would advise other people to write?
Like to write how how can they approach it? The daunting task of writing twenty thousand ***.
It's okay. So I would outline extensively.
I would do so many small documents. I would write log lines one paragraph Synopsys three page Synopsys, ten page Synopsys Beat Outline Step outlines character bios,
until I felt like I had enough,
to goto go to script on DH.
Now what I will identify is I will write maybe the major beats of my script.
I always know where my scripts and and so that's just a me thing like I can't even imagine the process that some people go in where they start writing without knowing how they're script ends.
Which is not to say that that's a bad thing. It's just I couldn't function that way.
So now, so long as I've got my five major beats my processes, I will start out writing a three page summary, and they nearly always turned into ten to fifteen page summaries.
Andi, that's the only prep I need to do before I go to pages.
Because then what I do is I like to find a lot more stuff while writing pages, because it's just more fun that way. Like how that breaks down into scenes and then who those scenes are with that.
I like finding that on the page is opposed to pre planning now.
So maybe Dr Zeros help me shift from that process to the latter process. Now, in both of these processes, the plot Israeli the problem.
It's nearly always either character moments.
How the character's journey is being conveyed to the audience, that I have to go back and rewrite and rewrite and rewrite, and that nearly always all that rewriting generally happens in the first act.
Because the storey, how this storey plays out and how it ends is what I want, how I wanted to go.
I just have to set up that storey on those characters so that they the audience goes along on that journey.
What I used to do, and if only enough, On some level I still think about it is Michael's Hague Hug had a sixth stage plot structure and,
the problem with trying like, In a way, we're trying to outline what would be a screenwriting course, and we're not going to do that where there are plenty of If you want to go and learn how to do nuts and bolts, they're playing online courses that will step you through it.
But this is kind of like high level thinking from our own experience.
Michael Hagee has his sick stage plot structure. You don't have to buy his books. I've seen him talk, but don't only books and what?
We can probably linked to just the visual graph.
Yeah, I'm pretty sure we talked about an episode one and two, which is that he broke a storey down into six stages, right stage one, and basically was Act one was broken into.
Act two is broken into Act three was broken into. This is an important point that I'll get to act one stage one set up, and there is a turning point, which is the opportunity.
Stage two is the new situation. Then there's a turning point, which is the change of plans Act to stage three. So act, too, eh?
Is progress. And then turning point three is the point of no return. Then stage for is high complications and high stakes. And then there is twenty point four major setback at three Stage five Final Push and then turning point five's. The climax and Stage six is the aftermath.
There's kind of two parts that we need to separate more in two parts. There's concept, there is kind of the characters, and there is the plot right for me, character wass and, I think, is increasingly becoming kind of not.
You know, I've talked a lot about the running condition in the loop, and that's the stuff I'm kind of interested in now and working and writers rooms.
That's the stuff that I actually think it's the most practical. I also, unlike you, tend to work with co writers so we will spitball characters.
To no end but often will come back to references to There's one character we've got in the back of their heads that were like she's like his characters.
Like Annabelle Crab is like this journalist who didn't get into ASIO and so she ends up working for a private spy company. And we've kind of got that. Gives us a feel of who the character is, what they want, what they need with Air Force, their weaknesses, all that stuff.
Because characters, as we talked about multiple times, are abstracted humans.
You know they need to make more sent their abstract none in the sense of becoming like Minsky and harder to become inscrutable but the opposite. They become simplified and more defined than real people.
So often. I'll think about character in those terms, and I find that exercise, which I've talked about before about finding a person in real life and thinking of an attribute.
You know, The example I've used before is when I was a waiting for a plane that playing the gate next to me was calling for this passenger and, you know, it was like Final call for chas fisher.
Let's just say Final call for chas fisher. You know the plane is waiting for you and this guy who's Bean waiting at the gate the whole time closes his laptop, puts in his bag on walks on the plane.
He was chas fisher right. He waited for everyone else to board.
All right, that is You can build a carriage around that that says something about who they are without necessary. The writing, character, voice documents, et cetera.
When it comes to planning, I will use the Michael Hey document.
It's a way of going. Here's your beginning and subdivided to subdivide and subdivisions an important thing because it's your midpoint and as well talk about I've talked about reform.
Continue to talk about. I think the reason we have men points is that they keep it interesting. They create contrast.
If we just stayed in stage one set up for ninety minutes, we will be bored.
So the easiest way to kind of structure one hundred page document it's a lot of writing is to start with something like that and just write those big beats, which is what you do in your outline and then kind of sort them what?
And I used to do it more fastidiously against the six stage plot structure.
Now I just write. We write down what the what We think those turning points are and kind of on index cards. Virtual rial.
But I'm a big fan of either and put them down and then you kind of organism. And then now, because they've got more experience going, Oh, it feels like we need a little bit more here.
Okay, that actually feels like it takes too long to get out, too. And that's how we start beating out a storey.
And then I have become a fan of scene breakdowns.
They work for us, and I'm gonna necessarily work for anyone else.
But we actually go in a screenwriting programme and go see name, and it doesn't have to be interior, but it's like either location or ah, broad location. House doesn't have to be kitchen because you're not worrying about in in terms of production and just write the big beats of what happens.
But that is like a stepping stone from Here's like a bullet point outline.
Two screenplay. But then we'LL take the scene breakdown and turn it straight into a script.
But the scene breakdown We'LL try to avoid dialogue because really, what we want to see is does this seem work without dialogue?
And then the dialogue is really fun too, right?
You know, it keeps us excited, and then you'LL find new things, but you've kind of got a map of where you're going.
The other thing I've noticed without writing is that my first draughts are now really long. It's not actually a problem, too. Right Words on a page anymore.
On a good day, I can write twelve pages, you know, which is a lot.
But off those twelve pages, maybe six. A good if you're lucky.
But the first document the first draught and becomes not a vomit draught.
It comes a real draft zero thie processes to Then call it because it's the first time we've given voice to these characters.
It's the first time we visited these locations. So we're doing ah, lot of what other people would put in short documents within the first draught.
And then our polish is just like calling the crap out of that and that were ruthless. We know how to cut.
So that means we, Khun, cut like a third out. But if other people want to put that stuff in supporting documents, they should.
You know it's the same thing.
The whole point of this is not to get prescriptive, were just sharing with you guys as our listeners what our process currently is and how how it's evolved over time.
I mean, for me to write that very first script, I had to do all the things that you're talking about in very great detail to write a tonne of documents on.
Then I woke up in our early each day and said, I am going to write to pages a day and I got to one hundred twenty page draft zero ages.
A day is very manageable amount, but I know writers who write incredible stuff that I could never write, and they do. Zero planning. They're all very intuitive. But then.
Slash spent a lot of time thinking.
Yeah, but then I think a lot of their rewriting process becomes then about structure where a lot of my rewriting process is about effect, not about structure.
So I don't really have to generally pull sequences apart or move stuff around too much. It's about taking what I've got and making it do Maur. What I wanted to do.
If I was to give people advice on how to right now, not to be prescriptive, but they don't know where to start. I am.
I like index cards, right. You can outline with index cards getting their debts. Cart's right. You're seeing ideas down.
I want this to happen. I want this to happen on whether this happened this this and this ideally, colour coded per character.
Because I'm assuming at this point you have an idea of who you characters are.
Even if you don't realise that even if because you're following someone, right, even if it's just a white because you're falling with one character and you start arranging the storey from that point.
But I think sometimes bouncing around and working long nearly works.
If I've done a rise like it's almost like a writer's room strategy Day one, which could be like part one could be that's just spitball. The concept of the characters in the world, right?
Hey, hey, hey and occasionally be like that. You'd love to see that same love to see that same love to see that scene when your brain storming, you write them down.
Day two would be or Phase two would be organiz ng all that stuff into a plot structure and obviously, understanding.
Putting takes experience. But even if you don't have experience, the only way to get experiences, too, get experience and then start organising it.
And what you'LL find is that maybe there'LL be palm cards off stuff that you like. That's cool scene that you don't need and you set it aside right?
But that is a way that I would work. So you kind of the process of brainstorming coming up with scenes of separate from the process of plotting, which is kind of a writer's room approach.
And I think that's still a really great way for writers to start because the reason that they're using in Raina's rooms is it works. They may be more efficient and come up with better stuff because they're experienced writers.
But the process produces material.
I'm a strong advocate of do whatever works for you.
I've just started listening to Cargill, who's the writing partner of Scott Derrickson.
And so they wrote Sinister and Doctor Strange together, he's got a podcast called right along,
and one of the very first episodes was just His advice was about set manageable goals, even if it's only write a paragraph a day.
Set a goal, a daily goal that you know you can hit so that you're not setting yourself up for failure and you'LL eventually get that because there's a big difference. I think we've spoken about this on different backmatter episodes.
I think there's a big difference between how you approach your writing your scripts as a process as a craft are into process, and then how you manage time, procrastination, discipline, like all those idiosyncrasies of your own personality.
Yeah, and we're pretty different in that regard. Only Yang Teo Yang. Yeah, when I'm focused, I'll produce material. But then I'd be like, I got to do with this other thing. Now let me focus on that.
There.
One of the funniest experiences was last year when I was rewriting a project with you attached to direct Was you,
sitting in the corner while I was doing all this like work and talking out loud, and all you would do is lob in hand grenades.
Occasionally, I think you were doing like online grocery shopping,
and occasionally you would say, What if we just cut that entire sequence and do this and we would then have to argue about it and it wasn't it was about the process anyway.
Yes, that's how I roll. So I know you're trying to say how whatever works people, but for people who've never started, they don't know what works for them.
And I'm just saying This is the advice that I'm now giving people to get them, which is don't don't work linearly.
You got the idea for a scene, right it down, Put on a palm card.
You Khun, structure it later because I think people get daunted by the very linear nature off Final draught or fade in and have a baby writer working in script now.
But it's a hard programme to use in this car's workman.
They've really like in terms of getting yourself out of your head on DH, letting you think I got this idea over here over here, but rather than you just *** *** all over the page.
But fundament, like coming back to it, though scene work is what's going to make your writing sing, you know, and that's a hard that a man.
That's a hard thing, but it's a good, good transition into Beginner's Guide to drive zero maybe.
So for those of you who are God, if he if you're turning into us for the first time, this episode haven't help you. So hopefully we've listened to a couple of other episodes and it just sort of hanging in to this one.
But we just thought we would Yeah, like our journey through draft zero has been What is our problem with our writing right now?
So it's often completely without thought or relevance to the episode before or after, and so has been a very haphazard route on DH.
You have very sensibly suggested that we just outline a few off the strongest episodes and grouping them together by the sort of craft area of screenwriting.
And so we've done that.
This will become a Web page. Just to be clear, we'LL do It is a page we'LL create a living document to make it easier for people defined areas of interest.
Yes, we will link to it.
Because obviously now, with fifty six episodes behind this, it's like, Where do I start?
And the answer is all of it, really? Ultimately, to become a good writer, you just need to know everything.
Yeah, yeah.
And that's hard, right? We're still learning.
But you can't just go. It's not a like how you put together your key asset. That's not how it works.
Yeah. Ondas muchas We broken these things down into sort of group headings like structure, character, scene, work, dialogue.
All of these things air interlinked like there's we've got one section called Scene work and another section called Character.
And there's two of our favourite episodes which one?
That the topic creates better scenes, but it also reveals character, and it becomes like a loop. If you've got really great characters bouncing off each other.
Then you're going tohave great scenes, and if you write a really good scene, it will inherently reveal character.
So it's not so much a chicken and egg scenario. It's just pointing out that, as you say, yes.
And as you said, Syria is kind of like you need to know it all at once.
So I think what we've decided to do is draft zero tends to ice skate through a whole bunch of topics based on what we've been interested in, that we kind of need to grew wth, um, under kind of like broadly themes.
So we've created a Web page of, like, a Beginner's Guide of Where You Potentially Khun start to cover some of the main areas and screenwriting. And also we're going to try and update our tagging system to make it easier to go.
I'm interested in every episode that's about this thing sequences, and there will be a whole bunch of all the episodes related to sequences as good as we can make it.
But the beginnings guy will be a webpage and hopefully a living document, and it's a good place to start if you don't know where to start. Other than that, one, which is not, is very the best way to experiences.
Okay, But it does what this does, is it? Ties is back in a way too.
The purpose ofthe draft zero, which is all about craft, right?
And we've had some listeners come to us and say All right, you know, you're helping me write better.
Seen to helping me write better characters. You're helping me do all these things, But you're not really helping me refine exactly what it is that I want to convey in this particular moment, or even in this whole idea or whole script.
And Tio boil that somewhat convoluted sentence down into an idea.
What draft zero about is about is how in writing.
But what we steer well away from is why Why are we compelled to sit down and slug out through an enormous feature film or a pilot script?
Okay. That's how you interpret the way. Okay.
Yeah, all right. How do you interpret the way?
Well, why people make the decisions that they make wise. Why should I choose to do this? Why should I choose to do that? Mike, I can't tell you.
You know, we can't tell you how to achieve the effect. We can't tell you why I choose to achieve that effect.
Absolutely. And to me, that boils down to like, even if you're talking on a character or a scene level, the effect that you want tohave on the audience,
also comes down to what is essentially it kind of comes down to theme and message that the filmmaker is wanting tohave and wanting to say and community.
And if you don't know that, then you might struggle. I mean, it's to ultimately, it comes down to this idea.
I mean, segregated from that because that's the question. But I am going to reframe it as question about aesthetics,
because I had a friend of mine who's an historian, and he he's got his first kind of like a history book coming out this year.
Like his phD a Storey and not an armchair historian, I collect things that are old.
He's a legit historian, and he's got a phD candidate that he's supervising.
And he's like the thing with history is, it's a literary discipline as agree, like there is a disciplined, like researching history. But the telling of the storey is the art of it.
He's like, I don't quite know how to teach this guy.
You know how to be creative, and it's like I don't think you can.
What we can teach them is a theory of aesthetics that, based in our understanding off narrative, this combination of things produces this outcome right.
It's like coming back to music. This chord progression produces this sound.
We can't tell you why to put things in a particular order to create a particular emotion.
Sometimes people wolf that, which is why people fall back on formulas. That's why music can often form for back before formulaic and particularly during the klaxon and classical periods with like, dances.
Well, this is a waltz. This is this. This is that because it had its purpose outlined.
So I think ultimately, that's why I call. What we're doing is narrative aesthetics, because it's a theory for understanding why, why we think stuff looks good, what feeling we think it creates.
But we can't tell you why you'd want to create that feeling in your audience.
I think we can't you know that's ultimately you, and you may choose to combine things in terrible combinations.
Maybe you can teach that stuff, but that's well beyond us. And obviously life certainly teaches people, you know.
Yeah, on often I do get a note where, like, people just keep pushing back and back and back on a certain thing that I'm doing. And ultimately, I have to say, that is what I want to do.
That is, I want my audience to feel the discomfort that you are feeling right now.
Okay, I'll make a broader point because I've had this conversation before in the context of music.
But I think it applies equally to film because they're largely both popular art forms.
And I mean that not in a derogative sense, but in the sense of their kind of mission, which is the certain music.
A CZ listens at this podcast of hurting you mention before I tend to listen to stuff. It's pretty dark and pretty heavy, a little bit out there, possibly my music.
Well, not even possibly my music tastes of certainly more extreme than my film tastes, and they're certain music that I listen to that is not meant to be enjoyed.
Right. It's the musical equivalent of a Francis Bacon painting is a meant to be pleasant.
It's meant to make you feel something intimate, you think.
But being quote on court entertaining, I's not its purpose, and that's OK, and I think sometimes that's okay with films.
But the problem is that film, largely speaking, is an industry that requires a certain number of people in order toe watching in. Therefore, we'LL get finance blah, blah, blah blood that their underlying element of entertainment is a keeper.
Economy is a key aspect of it, right? But films don't always have to be entertaining and sewing those moments of like, Maybe some people like watching films that are uncomfortable.
Well that their their films have famously r abrasive and aggressive to the audience. Like the ones that I know a lot.
I was going to say Requiem for a Dream or Irreversible. Those two films, I think, are masterpieces, but I will only ever want to watch them once that doesn't make for a very good business plan.
Land have returned.
No, but in terms of comes to your own writing is I think we're talking about films is the hole. But there's only sequences which gain a lot of power through being unpleasant in the moment.
I mean, we're recording this on the eve.
Miles actually come out, but that's pretend it's the IV endgame coming out.
Thie anticipation wouldn't be so high if they didn't end it in the way that they did, even if we know it's going largely get resolved positively.
The sense of discomfort or despair that it created the audience created in anticipation. There's a tension there.
There needs to be resolved, and sometimes the desire to make people people feeling uncomfortable about people feeling uncomfortable is a way to actually remove tension from work and therefore becomes disinterested becomes un interesting.
Now.
Because that's what tension is.
That unbearable sense of like I'm waiting for this to get resolved is either gonna be horrible or pleasant, you know, which is a kind of another fundamental riding principle. It's hard to articulate, but no tension.
There's contrast in there's tension, you know, that's even more than a midpoint.
The fundamental of a lot of what we have to do is to do with creating creation of tension. The unanswered question.
You know, that was a sick way for you to talk about questions, but.
Well, thank you for explaining my Segway.
Yeah, I think this is probably stating the obvious, but I've just come to a broader understanding off all of the aesthetics,
boils down to in terms of is particularly true of screenwriting, but is possibly true of any kind of narrative based art form,
where you don't want an absence of questions from an audience like If there's if they're not asking any questions, then they're not engaged.
They're not leaning forward. They're not wondering. They're not curious.
So you want questions from the audience. But more and more come to the feeling that all of these craft tools boiled down to in this moment,
what exactly do I want my own, my audience members to be feeling thinking or asking and setting up my film accordingly on?
I don't know if I have much more to say about it, other than I think moving forward with draft zero, it's going to be like their underlying questions that I'm going to be,
asking not of my own work and also of the different topics in areas that were attacked.
In what way is asking separate from their thinking.
Feeling I understand is something that can exist in the moment. I am happy. I'm sad. It's a particular scared.
Yeah, scared?
But what is what separates thinking from questions? I guess it's kind of talk about the favourite.
I guess maybe it's that sense of like you're contemplating its or thematic sequences, you contemplating it, meaning separate from what happens next.
Yeah.
Yeah, but I suppose is e guess as soon as you're contemplating. Maybe you are asking questions.
You ask questions in different way. It's a question that's different from what happens next becomes a question of what does this mean?
How do I feel? What does this mean? What happens next to kind of the fundamental quest?
But even that is mastery from a craft perspective.
This I have decided that at this moment, and we looked at this a lot in the,
in the antagonistic Siri's, particularly versus audience is when,
you know it can be in control off the filmmaker to say at this point, I'm going toe order my narrative so that my audience sits back and actually thinks about something separate to what they're actually seeing right now.
Interesting that you've gone in that direction when I've kind of doubled down on the simplicity of for dry, manic Sam.
I think your questions not wrong. I think they're good, but they're kind of like one step removed From what?
When you're working in broadly speaking the mode of drama of what to these characters want, Why can't they get it? Why now?
Because I think often those three basic questions of why are scenes are not working and that stops people from asking from feeling, thinking or question.
Yeah, and maybe it's it's cart before the horse.
But I often think that if unaudited in CE is wondering what's happening next, depending on the question that the audience is asking, you can get away with a lot on a micro level.
Okay, I'm going way. We're getting into a little bit of debate, which is good.
I think the difference is what you're talking about. Analytical tools and what I'm talking about, a creative tools,
because I think coming back to my observation about intent versus execution, your stuffs about intent and there's a lot of people go Well, this is what I want the audience to feel.
This is what I want them to think. This is what I want them tow you, no question.
But there's no ability for them to actually determine whether or not that is happening in their material.
You could easily say that well, this is what I want them to build in this scene with having no comprehension, that your scene is failing to do that.
Yeah, sure, Andi. Only way I get that insight. You know, saying what I said before is actually through feedback because I haven't written it to not achieve my intent, you know?
So it's only when I get consistent feedback saying this is not what I'm thinking or not what I'm feeling that I then go, Well, where have I stepped wrong that you're thinking about it.
And often the problem is, actually, they're asking a question that I should have removed from the equation.
They're asking something that I should have answered earlier.
And I think we're going to get into this a lot in our next episode, which is going to be looking at exposition in,
the later season, Season seven and season eight of Game of Thrones because they are masters at or they've got the luxury of being in such control over,
the questions that the audiences asking.
But I think you're right. I am very much thinking analytically rather than generative Lee and, you know, maybe that's a floor of mine, but I don't know. I feel that the generation is not something that I think about that often.
Yeah, maybe you should, like fundamentally, No one's going to look atyour piece of writing.
I mean, I know we're actually this is perfect backmatter People are not going to look a particular scene on like Okay, I'll rephrase.
They will. They'll understand This's what I feel. This is what I expect to feel right like And the thing is, audience feelings or thinking's about when people say this is how I feel. I think they're not wrong.
You can't argue with how your material made someone react, right?
The question for you is the rider is Is that okay?
Is this okay for them to feel that way you might antagonise,
that person may not like your material, and that's okay because it's not for them its the wrong junk or or whatever, but often to fix that you're not going to necessarily You're going to be going and changing the feeling over thinking,
all the next questioning you're going to be relying on,
those things are consequences off the underlying dramatic writing, right.
And so you can only operate and ask those things of yourself. If your dramatic writing is so good and not yours, yours is yet jazz for that to just be a AM complete mastery of my craft that I can make people feel and think and question, however I want them to.
Please, listeners. Rest assured, I do not feel that I have achieved this level.
It is Mohr, I guess, conceptually for me. Like what is the purpose?
The underlying purpose of storytelling on both the macron, a micro level and how do identify whether my writing is working for me is if someone's asking a question at a point where I want them.
Tio, either not be asking questions are asking a different question or feeling something.
Then it's something's gone wrong.
There's a quote from Tom Stoppard's The Rial Thing, Then I'm going to read, which is about a cricket bat. But I read the whole quote.
I saw Hugo Weaving performed there, so imagine I'm Hugo Weaving.
The thing here, which walks like a wooden club, is actually several pieces off particular would commonly put together in a certain way.
So the whole thing is sprung like a dance, for it's for heating cricket bats with to get it right.
The cricket ball will travel two hundred yards in four seconds, and all you've done is give it a knock, like knocking the top off a bottle of stout.
And it makes a noise like a trout taking a fly.
What we're trying to do is write cricket bats so that we throw up in idea and give it in a little knock.
It might travel right, and for May I boil this down to the job of articulation on what we're talking about in terms of dramatic drama is articulation is we make things aerodynamic right.
The better our riding, the more aerodynamic our ideas are.
And those ideas could be about character. That could be about theme that Khun b about plot that could be anything.
And our abilities to make it aerodynamic and draft zero is about Maybe if you look at this little foil and we kind of like Ben bend the wing this sort of way that maybe that idea just travels that little bit further, right?
And so, for may, it's like, Is it useful, like, obviously going to be sitting there? Well, where do you want to place the cricket ball?
It's like, Well, once you can place the *** heat is six. It doesn't really matter where you want to *** put the cricket ball. You gotta learn how to hit the six in the first place.
For anyone who's a cricket fan out there. I sincerely apologise for Soos ham fisted analogy here.
Okay? Okay. Yes. You always want to pull it out. You want to pull that sheet, You're six. That you're *** leg stump.
Short meeting. Silly mid on. No, no, no.
Okay, I think I've mentioned this in previous backmatter Sze A cz well is.
When I went to all that effort of writing that first script, you then gave me devastating feedback, like really devastating feedback.
I'm sure if I search my e mails, I could find it somewhere, which was basically that my first group was a steaming pile of ***.
And, you know, you give me feedback for working on it, but as crippling as it was, you then sent me the David Foster Wallace.
This is what.
There are these two young fish swimming along, and they happen to meet an older fish swimming the other way.
Who nods at them and says, Morning, boys, how's the water?
And the two young fish swim on for a bit, and then eventually one of them looks over at the other and goes, What the hell is water?
This is a standard requirement of US commencement speeches, the deployment of the tactic, little parable ish storeys.
The Storey thing turns out to be one of the better, less bullish, any conventions of the genre. But if you're worried that I plan to present myself, here is the wise older fish explaining what water is to you. Younger fish. Please don't be. I am not the wise old fish.
The point of the fish storey is merely that. The most obvious important realities are often the ones that are hardest to see and talk about.
And that actual that accept help me keep writing after having spent all this time and effort writing a steaming pile.
Sh was the idea that by writing that first awful draught, I was now waken Teo a whole new realm of possibilities, and here we are five years later.
Still exploring the whole new realm of possibilities throughout stinking piles of ***.
It's they still sneak. The diet may have changed, but they still think I'm laughing. I I don't know if there's a lesson we Khun draw from that. Maybe I can try.
I guess what I'm trying to do is reiterate the utility off.
Not just over draft zero of focusing on the craft to pick eight. I don't actually give a ***.
Honestly, I don't I don't give a *** about your ideas.
If you cann't articulate them, right, a very practical level, you can have the greatest idea, right? And this is a problem, right?
So I'm going to rephrase this because I think there is a correlation between people assuming the people who can speak and write well have good ideas.
And this's gonna be so controversial. And I want to drop the hand grenade.
Someone like Dr Jordan Peterson shows the danger of that where she'd ideas dressed up in beautiful language mixed in with good ideas can confuse people. And they think because they're well articulated that they're good ideas, right?
Because we've got the inverse of that. I just said that to trigger a whole bunch of people.
It's also true, ten percent on sense.
The inverse of that is we also maybe assumption that people that Kontic yah late ideas are idiots. And that is not necessarily true.
Both because you and I have studied law. We actually know the ability to argue an idea Well, does not actually mean that the idea is any good, right?
That's the whole point of law is that you argue bad ideas? Well, you just don't know what whether yours idea is the god of the bad one.
But when you're talking about riding on a professional level, your job is to articulate, you know, to make it understood it doesn't.
Actually, your intent will either be yours or will be someone else's.
It's going to be someone else going. This is what I want. I want toe horror film under one hundred pages that we can make for five hundred thousand dollars. It's got this cast and it's got this feel and you, as professional writer, have to articulate and execute that right?
A ll The Esa Terry Thinking about running is you want to use that to inform your writing, But what is going to get your hide is your ability to execute because often in a professional setting other people that are telling you where you're going you're going toe shoot your six.
Where you going? Toe Kick you where you're going to kick your home Goal. I don't know. I'm trying to think.
Stewart actually enjoy sport a lot more than he is lying about right now.
I'm deliberately mixing my metaphors.
Yeah, I Look, I think this is hopefully men.
A somewhat interesting discussion for our listeners about approach on DH.
You know, a lot of screenwriting is is problem solving like so often I'm like, I know what the idea That I want the scene. Tio do.
And I could just have two characters arguing that but that's often the most boring and obvious route.
And then the troubling things How doe eyed dramatise thiss How do I turn this conflict that I want to thematically talk about into a narrative?
Because you just had to spend some time in the Facebook streamlining group. There's a lot of people with hard, fast ideas about what they want to do. That's not what makes you valuable right.
Well, talking about value.
Faster.
I think that I'm gonna latch onto that light to guide us out of this dark cave of abstract conversation into a discussion about having your work produced.
Because director bought me an amazing idea and he is a writer director, and he could have written it himself, but brought it to me to write it quicker on DH.
Hopefully better in collaboration, and we did, and we wrote a short and we're really excited about, and it's starting to get into some festivals on.
We're really happy about it, but so no, but I won't start with the, but I'm going to start with the encourage any aspiring writers out there to try and talk Teo directors.
And there's there's something about getting your work produced that is like, That's the point of Thiss, isn't it? And writing all the scripts in the world that never getting them produced is not the point.
And there's so many things to learn from having your work produce. And there's lots of people who can talk to this.
But I don't want to talk about having my work produced a tte this point.
I do want to talk about what your expectations should be.
Going into that kind of collaboration at this kind of career stage that I'm at on DH, what has been my experience coming out of it being produced.
So the idea was his.
The directors on DH, I wrote it, So I have copyrighted the script.
He then produced it self financed it, which is amazing honour and privilege.
While I wrote it, he had a massive hand in the development.
You know, Tio end up with a sixteen page script. It took us a year back and forth between myself and the director, but we both went into it knowing that there was a feature in this idea.
And the reason why I contributed my services for nothing as a rider was to have an opportunity,
to have a produce piece of work, which was essentially a proof of concept for a feature that I would then be able to write,
Andi on. It's the same for him.
He would have a proof of concept on DH, a pitch for a feature that we could then get, you know, commercial interests in and go forth and be produced.
Which is fantastic, and we had these expectations down in writing going into it, which I strongly recommend Anyone do, like, get something in writing.
It doesn't have to be a legally binding document. Doesn't have to be an option agreement.
All those things would be good. But get something in writing as to what you believe.
Your rights and expectations are moving forward where it's been really difficult. Coming out of this process is that the script has been a success.
A cz muchas a short.
You know a short romcom about vasectomies can ever, ever be.
But just the heartache off getting a feature project up, especially in Australia.
But I imagine this is the same. Everywhere is lots of people want to buy a concept on by a proven idea on DH,
there's a There's a much bigger market for buying a concept than there is for funding a feature film on What do I mean by this distinction is that,
there would be a lot more opportunities for him and I to sell,
the idea that we've got,
or even write up a pitch and sell the pitch or even get to the point of writing up the script and selling the script.
But that's not why he has invested his time and money. He wants his.
You know, this to be a leg towards his first feature film, or his first directing gig on a TV Siri's or something like that on one of the things that I didn't realise is that coming into this,
coming out of it, even though we both want to make this project and we both want to make it together, we've got very different career incentives,
and Korean needs as a screenwriter and as a director.
Comparing it with my experience is I've never written a short film that's been directed by someone else.
I've directed scripts that have been written by someone else,
but the scripts that I've written that to be directed by someone else one of those was I was originally intending to direct, and it became clear that we couldn't get the financing with me attached, so I decided.
Not because of you in particular, but you as a first time director. Okay.
Both. Ultimately, which is what makes directing so *** hard compared to riding, I think because riding they'LL take it.
Sze a lot lower risk to hire first time writers, and they can always get you rewritten, you know, But they're not going to go. Let's get a first time director I'm born and getting redirected.
It's.
By someone we can trust. That's getting to direct this from the chief and then we'LL redirect, get redirected later.
I mean, that kind of happens in direct ways. There's definitely a lot of storeys when you scratch under the surface of like editors shooting reshoots after the director's not being invited back after they've had in the director's card and all that stuff.
But they're all, like, actual, honest to God, Hollywood storeys that no one really tells about in the press circuit.
So but I think moving forward in all cases, there is definitely a reason tohave agreements in some way.
I think that's important may. Having myself, I just treat for me, riding is a lot less emotional than directing.
I think for other people, it's the opposite that some of them find, like directing a real craft, and they found writing really personal. For me, it's complete. Opposite.
Directing is very emotional on DH draining where is riding on community yet they could do that.
What do you want? And I'm not saying I'm doing a good job of it, but I can kind of take in a non personal way.
But I think in terms of projects, ultimately you're talking about the creation of intellectual property, which has value, and deciding how.
That project will move forward with the understanding that they can become a situation where one on two people are decreasing the value.
I'm not saying this is specifically you, like in your situation, but I'm talking in the abstract. Khun Devalue a project right so that it's working out. What is your exit strategy?
Is there an exit strategy? Because someone can come on board and go?
And I've heard projects now given the current climate, and I'm not trying to make a political comment.
But what's like Juma? All writers writing script, predominantly female casts and a funding body, government or private is gone.
We think we need to female voice obvious in order to move to the next stage. So we are stepping you aside for you to move forward, we need to step you aside and then put a female voice.
Thing is a writer. That's probably a lot easier to deal with because there are traditions and processes for managing credit arbitration.
Where is with directing? It's like you could be. You could do a lot of developmental script,
and not contribute a word and no longer be involved in the project and get and not shoot anything so you don't even get an executive producer credit.
So, you know, in this state, I would say, If you're a director, I would say approach material developing as a producer like option material.
Yeah.
This is This is what I would say for those of us amongst the directors is if you are working with a writer on developing natural option it, and that means that you have got proximity not just China tile, but your proximity.
So then you khun someone else. You might then in your option agreement, have the ability to sell the option agreement on or injury genuine partnerships, or even if you no longer director, that you're in a position of being a producer.
Whereas I think writers because fundamentally, they contribute to the regiment era a literate, more protected.
But that protection also makes complication is if there is a tiff between the writers or if produced, just say, someone comes along and goes, There's two of you you know, I more than a paper team.
But you're not necessarily like Boff riding buddies wearily right together.
You know there's a spectrum between where any running as a team because someone told us to end.
When the ever write together, there's actually a whole I think for a lot of writing partnerships arisen in between that someone comes along and goes, for whatever reason, we,
like this writer more than you, or we're going to put a female writer, but we want them to write with one, haven't understanding of how that's going to work and trying to put a value on that.
It's a complicated thing, but you need Teo. Have, as you say, something written down.
It doesn't have to be a full deal memo because ultimately it's just a written intention as both of us being ways you an actual practising lawyer all know ridden intention will be used to inform any decision.
Well, just coming out of this, like, obviously, that's the key lesson.
Get your intentions written up somewhere, even if it's just in une male.
But the if you are in the position that I was where you're an emerging and aspiring writer and you are writing for a director,
even when the collaboration is great and even when you want to work together on the project moving forward,
I think what I've come to the understanding ofthe is moving forward that it has to be the director's project as muchas.
I value my input and, you know, I'm not trying to undermine it.
It's just that it's harder for a director to get across the line, particularly first time director, than it is for a writer.
And as a result, if you're doing anything where you're together, it's going to be getting the director across the line.
And so that's my key lesson walking into this and to be clear, I would do it again, and I have zero regrets.
This guy didn't amazing job. He took my work. He had faith with me in me. He spent a good chunk of his life arguing with me.
On on DH.
I'm so proud of what came out of it. You know, it's the first time I've had work produced. Well, I haven't produced it.
And it's such an honour, and I'm so excited tohave it out there in the world.
And you know, we are having meetings off the back of it. We are pitching it.
It's just a very quickly realised that it's It's no, it's not my baby to pitch like I'm there to service the director getting this job. Yes.
In this situation and weren't necessarily there has been cases of short films like Sync.
Sling Blade ended up being directed by someone who I think I believe all the thought in directed. And he didn't direct the short.
There have been situations where the writing has been more important than than directing.
Absolutely. But I guess at some point either there was either the writer was a producer on that or had chain of title or the director of the underlying material was poured out at some point.
Yeah, well, yes and no. I mean, it could just be there was a case with a black Mirror episode where the rider, because thie original BBC version the writing fees were so low,
the kind of they're not residual kind of whatever reserve rights to do with, like adaptations and stuff were kept with the writers with this one particular right up.
So, in other words, the writing agreement on this particular episode of BlackBerry company, which one meant that they had the right to produce the film and exclusivity over television adaptations but not feature films.
So the writer Reese turned it into a feature film and then sold the feature script.
There are ways that you could do that as a writer, and so with restoration, and I'm still working with that producer.
But part of our agreement wass that the right to produce restoration was non exclusive, both in terms ofthe derivative material, so it would be derivative rights, both in terms of the derivative rights and remake rights.
So with restoration, we could have sold the script to someone else to remake. Or we could have.
We could have sold the derivative, like so the feet that feature or a television series or a stage play or musical or a comic book or whatever.
And so that can be something that if you were working on a short film level, that you can think about doing that. You can say I'm gonna let you produce this and you've got the right to produce the short film. But it's only exclusive, Desperate to be of short.
And that is a reflection off you having expressed your intention and having that captured in writing, in fact, contractually, But, you know, before going too far down the road.
Kind of helps when the producer the time has a lawyer and I got a little background and they now have a lawyer, so it kind of,
yeah, yeah, But I think it sze making sure that you understand the intent but also understand the possibilities of intent, Which is why I'm talking about derivative rights because I think it's probably something that emerging right screenwriting probably don't even know where is not like that.
You can carve out separately, right?
And I'm in the process of negotiating an option on a short storey and derivative rights on the short storey is something that is part of our option, because we may be able to get a cheaper option if our put a purchase price.
If our purchase price option doesn't include the TV Siri's, for example, or, you know we have to be very clear about what areas of exclusivity were taking.
But I think that's a good option for a feature film for a short film. Sorry if they're you're running a short for a director, but your specific instances different cause it's the directors idea and he had reading material of speaking to it.
So he's at least got a night idea in a fixed form.
God, we just turned into an episode of script notes for a brief moment. I'm bred.
Well, no, no umbrage, no umbrage. It'Ll It's Maur. Hey!
I'm Craig means that I'm the Craig Mason. If draft zero everyone *** knows that the other road.
Ah! So I've only got one final topic to cover in this backmatter episode, which is broadly under the topic off Forgiving yourself for not writing.
So I am considered within my circle of writing friends,
fairly prolific for someone who has a full time, non writing job, I will generally produce two to three feature scripts a year, and I'm quite disciplined in my writing.
And so it's become part of my personality but also part of my enjoyment of life, Right, Like writing,
makes me happy, and I always applaud Thie script notes episode where they brought on a psychologist.
I think it was Columbo was like psychologists who was talking about like, It's okay to quit.
And I do applaud that because there've been times when I'm like the amount of hours that I poured into this over the last number of years. Like surely there'd be something better to pour my time into, but ultimately, because I get pleasure from it.
No, it hasn't. I'm still hanging in there, but in the last year of my life, my father in law was diagnosed with early onset Alzheimer's.
God, you're You're opening up with the whole back. Horrible, Baxter.
I mean, well, e want to give a brief summary to give people an idea of the scale of it.
My mother in law has been diagnosed with terminal cancer.
My wife is there any child, and in amongst that my aunt has died. Who's my only my mother's only sibling on DH?
My wife and I have had our own kind of separate problems, and we've got two small *** children which of their own massive time suck. So it just means.
Who's there's May and who's the?
Ah, on DH in Amongst that very little writing got done in the last year of my life.
And so part of me despairs because I've lost that therapy. I've lost that part of my life. That brings me joy.
But on top of that, it's made me go our ***.
I'm not producing new material, which means I'm not, you know, keeping my contacts live with new stuff.
And I'm not like pushing my career along, and I'm not writing that next thing that could be the thing that starts it, and and suddenly not only do I have a ll this other ***,
but I'm also beating myself up for not writing, and I'm just here, I guess.
The wanting to say to all the people out there who, you know, I listen to these podcast like the right along podcast, where is, like, just set a manageable goal every day and hit that.
And I'm like, I can't even do that with where I'm at in my life of the moment.
From someone who was incredibly disciplined to not even being able to say I'm going to write a page a day or even a paragraph a day like I don't have that space in my life,
and I want it Oh, I guess, say to the people who are struggling for whatever reason, with writing that, it doesn't mean you've quit.
If you don't want it to mean that you haven't quit and that's where I'm at.
I haven't quit, but I'm forgiving myself for not writing as much as I've had, because thank you, because beating myself up about it is helping.
No one is not helping me write more.
It's not helping my life situation.
In fact, it can actually kind of produce its own writer's block because you end up spending, you end up spending emotional energy in feeling guilty about not writing when they're maybe that time you can get tiny little bit.
You can accumulate that kind of little *** Greece that the bottle on the detained can scrape together. And you might find some time to write emotional energy because often I'm not going. I am not going into my ship.
But I've had a pretty bad, no different way bad to you.
You can't compare.
You can't. I've had my own things to struggle with in two thousand nineteen, and I've just got no gas in the tank, Right?
I did hand into script and *** January and kind of burnout on top of the personal stuff, right?
You know, having two scripts. You In January, I cut one hundred *** ads in two months for a huge project, whereas like sleeping in the office and all that *** like I was exhausted and then other *** came on top of it.
Personal stuff. And I just got no emotional energy to putting running, and I love writing, but running drains me emotionally right, like it should,
you know, it's uses, you know, when I'm writing well, it uses parts of myself.
You know, I'm one of those people that cries when they write. I'm going. Come on. Not in like I'm running like not as in writing as therapy.
But, you know, I get into the emotional experience of writing and, God, we should put it right out front.
I'm gonna put it right from my one piece of advice.
I got back in film school and is always and only gets more through every year I write, which is right. The experience.
That's the fundamental thing of whatever you're doing, whether it's drama, comedy, whatever, like non narrative, blah, blah, blah.
You're right in terms of a selling document, brightly experience work out.
Your job as a writer is to work out how to write the experience off whatever it is you're trying to make.
Put that in the front of the episode, and we don't have to include it here.
But if you've got just know gas in the tank, that's nothing to draw from everything. I'm going to write his *** so and me feeling guilt about not writing which I do because I've had a friend going.
Them.
You're finding time to right now like I know what's going on because your time find too right. It's not you.
It's like that just makes me feel worse. And that means you're feeling anxious about it. Just burns whatever. Little *** a little bit of fuel's left, you know?
But at some point, I know because I'm just I'm different from you.
You have a lot more disciplined. I'm like I got a project on and then we got folks, we got a deadline of two weeks go crazy, but are, you know, because largely have had a lifestyle where Aiken rejig stuff around to make that work.
But at this point, I can't even do stuff.
But, you know, thinking back on it, there's kind of a couple more personal journal Lee stuff that I've written.
I start writing in my journal, but I really some weird kind of Facebook self reflective Facebook posts which were serving as a former writing, you know, But they're not narrative.
But they're feeding that that it's now. I guess I want to couch this in the like. The warning is yes, forgive yourself for not writing right, but so I was.
There was a couple of points where in this journey I was feeling that I needed to write, and I actually managed to negotiate with everything that was going on my life and build time to write and found that,
hour and a half and I sat down and I just had nothing, right.
And I end up playing IOS games for an hour and a half and then felt guilty because I'd wasted this time that I had fought so hard. Tio have.
And so it's not about, you know, I don't wantto, I guess, endorse people giving into the,
the fallacy of Oh, I I'm struggling and I can't write under these circumstances or what have you like.
I don't want to get in the way of people doing what they need to do to get to the point of writing, but I am there again where I can write again on DH.
It's just been about making that time available and not putting pressure on myself. to do it or not, but just making the space available in my life.
Yeah, I guess there's a quote which I'm not going to endorse, but I'm going to say it, which is?
Writers don't fail. They just go.
And the problem is, is assumes that it's a binary and unfortunately, the problem so many things in this world is they're not binaries. We just like to put make compile Aries, right.
Yeah, like character decisions in an upcoming episode of draft zero.
Well or everything we like putting into via Larry because it's simple. And the sad truth is, the reason we feel the need to do that with is just because everything is just *** shades of grey.
And I think then therefore it's easier to go.
Well, if I'm not writing and I've either quitted or I've failed and because I don't believe in failure, that means I've quitted and it's like, Well, no, you know, maybe a long time.
And what does it look like? I mean, I'm far less concerned about my screenwriting career than I am about my directing one, but that's a conversation for a podcast called Take Zero where I talk about direct, not this one.
But I think it's important to say it's okay to take pauses and to replenish the well which we've talked about before. Sometimes you need to go on just what stuff that's creative and find that weighs Teo.
Self care has become a term that goes around a lot.
But I think also when you're an emerging creative burnout is a factor, right and that we often think about it, burn out in the context of work.
And certainly because I'm freelance, my whole life feels like on the teetering on the edge of rejection that there's some point when you know, I Yep, I got no more energy to deal with.
Rejection in every facet of my life that way actually feed our own burnout with our hobbies as hobby. Quite according hubby of screenwriting.
Well, if we're not getting a well in my case and yours too, it's semi professional. I make money from riding does not a lot, but you can suffer from burn out.
You know, I don't think burnout is exclusive as much as those articles to all you work in a creative field or you're a lawyer or you're a ll. This and all that. It's like, Well, you could be burned out from *** life, You know.
Well, I guess sorry to end on such a depressing topic, but I hope that it's something that,
eyes relatable to our listeners and that people can actually take her heart from.
I don't think with the thing with writing. To me, it's not depressing, like maybe I will not pick up the keyboard pen for ten years. But I can, because the cost of entry is so low.
And one of the advantages of screenwriting, unlike dragging, is that it's free and that largely they only give a *** about the reading words on the page.
You know, like guest meetings were part if you want screenwriting career and all that stuff.
But if you just weren't right, something that people are potentially going to make and that may be the one thing you ever do on, that's fine because that's what the process of being an artist is.
Sometime you can do it, and that may sound like me being native, but it's actually like a positive.
It's always going to be there. It's not goingto run away. And yes, you, you might get creaky and get a bit rusty.
But it's not going to disappear. I guess it's like riding a bike.
In that sense, you know, I'm not going to like when I turn up to a meeting training people to finance my feature. When I'm like forty something, I'm washed up. That's different.
That is a sour note.
Well on a positive note, we would love to thank our patrons.
I feel us diving into patriot has been riel.
Success for us in the we were looking for ways to in amongst full time work, trying to write and to record draft zero plus life ***.
Find a way to incentivise us to release Maur draft zero Mohr often.
And we could have done that through advertising. We could have done that through pay walls, and I think Patriot has been by far the best way to do it.
We still haven't hit the levels we where we could employ someone to do post for us, which would allow us to get you guys mohr draft zero muchmore often.
But the money that you guys do contribute has definitely, you know, it may feel to you guys dear listeners, that we don't get episodes to you very often. But trust me, your contributions are making them get to you more often than they otherwise would.
So thank you so much to all of you. Our patrons.
I Stuart, I've had various conversations where I thought we would get, like one hundred one dollars.
Patri ins on DH.
What it's turned out to be is we've got very, very few one dollar patrons and a whole lot of top tier patriots who want to engage us with dialogue who seemed to like what we do really want to support us.
So very huge, thanks to you guys.
Stewart. I think you said that one of the things that that your money is going to is already we're We're trying to do transcripts and trying to get them up on,
on the website, and that's already yielding some results.
Yes, Well, I mean, we're paying. Yes, we're doing computerised transcripts partly because, you know, podcast so great is an audio form.
Some humorous.
But if you're, you know, manoeuvring Khun here and having transcripts available Ideally, he cleaned up by human.
So it's accessible. Tow a ride variety of people is important, but it's also important for like, searching and cross referencing. And in future, some of the archiving.
There is tech coming with podcasts like players where you, Khun, search within an episode and jump to specific parts of the episode based on search results that will be tied to the transcripts. So that's awesome.
All that said and done particular special, thanks to Cary Harris, Devin Pull Gregory, Chris Walker, Crab Edmonds, Rob Draper, Daniel Bernanke and Sandra,
A. Blessing Entra.
Yeah, and if you want to become a patron, will include links in the show.
Notes. You'LL also get access to discount emerge. Nice, but if you prefer just to buy a hoodie or shirt or a pillow case or a toe.
Paige, there's a link in the show notes to our tea Public page Maur designs come soon beaches by the current design.
I certainly rocket all the time.
Chazz is not cool enough, so I wouldn't let him have one.
The biggest incentive for our Patriots appears to be like voting on our homework. If you want to. John's devote on the films that we consider, yes, that's one way to get involved.
On DH, I guess.
I mean, we just you know, we're rambling at this point. Are you speaking about the regularity of the episodes? I think we've reached an interesting point. We had this conversation before we recorded this, but it's worth kind of ending on that.
Think when we first started out, there was a bunch of really clear or seemingly clear topics. We wanted to cover mid points, point of view status and then we kind of and we had a few examples, like Tarantino TV pilots.
But as we've developed, we've covered a lot of those simple topics, and now we're getting interested in stuff that's a lack of a better word. Esoteric.
And it could be realistically that we end up releasing fewer episodes, but each episode being a deeper dive.
If we can motivate ourselves to do homework, for example, and I'm not, I'm not making no promises because it's taken us over a *** year to do,
get around to Sofia Coppola, but would be *** amazing to do the three like it, Not it the Shining.
I think the winnings to do this shining, read the book, look at the Kubrick movie and look at the television Siris.
Kind of compare the adaptations to me that would be a really fascinating exercise that would probably encompass the whole bunch of other *** that we've learned.
But that's a serious amount of work. So it's very possible if we decide to go down to, basically will be doing, like, Game of Thrones like Season Seven Night, where it's like we're only gonna do six episodes, but they're going to be like double length episodes and in a way, two years for it. But they'LL be awesome.
And but that's why we do a per episode model for draft zero rather than a monthly, because it means you only pay for when we release.
So thanks, everyone. We will see you soon with the Promise. Game of Thrones episode on DH Upcoming episodes are, as jurors said, the long awaited Sofia Coppola episode as well as Mohr explorations off character journeys.
If you would like toe argue with either stu willis myself about anything we've discussed in this episode, you can find many ways of contacting us at www dot draught,
zero dot com on DH There.
You will also find the show notes for this episode as well as links, too.
Spread the word about this podcast on apple podcasts on DH.
If you're feeling even more supportive, you can also find links. Toe up,
takes a while. It's going to take you a while. It's normal to take a while, and you just have to your way through that.